federalist number six concerning dangers
from dissensions between the states
for the independent journal hamilton to
the people of the state of new york
the three last numbers of this paper
have been dedicated to an enumeration of
the dangers to which we should be
exposed in a state of disunion from the
arms and arts of foreign nations
i shall now proceed to delineate dangers
of a different and
perhaps still more alarming kind those
which will in all probability flow from
dissensions between
the states themselves and from domestic
factions and convulsions
these have been already in some
instances slightly anticipated but they
deserve a more particular and more full
investigation
a man must be far gone in utopian
speculations who can seriously doubt
that
if these states should either be wholly
disunited or only united in partial
confederacies
the subdivisions into which they might
be thrown would have frequent and
violent contests with each other
to presume a want of motives for such
contests as an argument against their
existence
would be to forget that men are
ambitious vindictive and rapacious
to look for a continuation of harmony
between a number of independent
unconnected sovereignties in the same
neighborhood
would be to disregard the uniform course
of human events and to set it defiance
the accumulated experience of ages
the causes of hostility among nations
are innumerable
there are some which have a general and
almost constant operation upon the
collective bodies of society
of this description are the love of
power or the desire of preeminence and
dominion
the jealousy of power or the desire of
equality and safety
there are others which have a more
circumscribed though an equally
operative influence within their spheres
such are the rival ships and
competitions of commerce between
commercial nations
and there are others not less numerous
than either of the former which take
their origin entirely in private
passions in the attachments enmities
interests hopes and fears of leading
individuals in the communities of which
they are members
men of this class whether the favorites
of a king or of a people
have in too many instances abused the
confidence they possessed
and assuming the pretext of some public
motive have not scrupled to sacrifice
the national tranquility
to personal advantage or personal
gratification the celebrated pericles in
compliance with the resentment of a
prostitute at the expense of much of the
blood and treasure of his countrymen
attacked vanquished and destroyed the
city of the samnians
the same man stimulated by private peak
against the magurensians
another nation of greece or to avoid a
prosecution with which he was threatened
as an accomplice of a supposed theft of
the statuary phidius or to get rid of
the accusations prepared to be brought
against him for dissipating the funds of
the state in the purchase of popularity
or from a combination of all these
causes was the primitive author of that
famous and fatal war
distinguished in the grecian annals by
the name of the peloponnesian war
which after various vicissitudes
intermissions and renewals
terminated in the ruin of the athenian
commonwealth the ambitious cardinal who
was prime minister to henry viii
permitting his vanity to aspire to the
triple crown entertained hopes of
succeeding in the acquisition of that
splendid prize by
the influence of the emperor charles v
to secure the favor and interest of this
enterprising and powerful monarch he
precipitated england into a war with
france
contrary to the plainest dictates of
policy and at the hazard of the safety
and independence
as well of the kingdom over which he
presided by his councils as of europe in
general
for if there ever was a sovereign who
bid fair to realize the project of
universal monarchy
it was the emperor charles v of whose
intrigues wolsey was
at once the instrument and the dupe the
influence which the bigotry of one
female the petulance of another
and the cabals of a third had in the
contemporary policy ferments and
pacifications of a considerable part of
europe are topics that have been too
often discanted upon not to be generally
known to multiply examples of the agency
of personal considerations in the
production of great national events
either foreign or domestic according to
their direction
would be an unnecessary waste of time
those who have but a superficial
acquaintance with the sources from which
they are to be drawn
will themselves recollect a variety of
instances and those who have a tolerable
knowledge of human nature will not stand
in need of such lights to form their
opinion either of the reality or extent
of that agency
perhaps however a reference tending to
illustrate the general principle
may with propriety be made to a case
which has lately happened among
ourselves
if shays had not been a desperate debtor
it is much doubted whether massachusetts
would have been plunged into a civil war
but notwithstanding the concurring
testimony of experience
in this particular there are still to be
found visionary or designing men who
stand ready to advocate the paradox of
perpetual peace between the states
though dismembered and alienated from
each other the genius of republics
say they is pacific the spirit of
commerce has a tendency to soften the
manners of men and to extinguish those
inflammable humors which have so often
kindled into wars
commercial republics like ours will
never be disposed to waste themselves in
ruinous contentions with each other they
will be governed by mutual interest
and will cultivate a spirit of mutual
amity in concord
is it not we may ask these projectors in
politics
the true interest of all nations to
cultivate the same benevolent and
philosophic spirit
if this be their true interest have they
in fact pursued it
has it not on the contrary invariably
been found that momentary passions and
immediate interest
have a more active and imperious control
over human conduct than general or
remote considerations of policy utility
or justice
have republics in practice been less
addicted to war than monarchies
are not the former administered by men
as well as the latter are there not
aversions
predilections rivalships and desires of
unjust acquisitions that affect nations
as well as kings
are not popular assemblies frequently
subject to the impulses of rage
resentment jealousy avarice
and other irregular and violent
propensities
is it not well known that their
determinations are often governed by a
few individuals in whom they place
confidence and are of course liable to
be tinctured by the passions and views
of those individuals
has commerce hitherto done anything more
than change the objects of war
is not the love of wealth as domineering
and enterprising a passion as that of
power or glory
have there not been as many wars founded
upon commercial motives since
that has become the prevailing system of
nations as were before occasion by the
cupidity of territory or dominion
has not the spirit of commerce in many
instances administered new incentives to
the appetite both for the one and for
the other
let experience the least fallible guide
of human opinions be appealed to for an
answer to these inquiries
sparta athens rome and carthage were all
republics
two of them athens and carthage of the
commercial kind
yet were they as often engaged in wars
offensive and defensive as the
neighboring monarchies of the same times
sparta was little better than
well-regulated camp and rome was never
sated of carnage and conquest
carthage though a commercial republic
was the aggressor in the very war that
ended in her destruction
hannibal had carried her arms into the
heart of italy and to the gates of rome
before scipio in turn gave him an
overthrow in the territories of carthage
and made a conquest of the commonwealth
venice in later times figured more than
once in wars of ambition
till becoming an object to the other
italian states pope julius ii found
means to accomplish that formidable
league which gave a deadly blow to the
power and pride of this haughty republic
the provinces of holland till they were
overwhelmed in debts and taxes took a
leading and conspicuous part in the wars
of europe
they had furious contests with england
for the dominion of the sea
and were among the most persevering and
most implacable of the opponents of
louis xiv
in the government of britain the
representatives of the people compose
one branch of the national legislature
commerce has been for aegis the
predominant pursuit of that country
few nations nevertheless have been more
frequently engaged in war
and the wars in which that kingdom has
been engaged have in numerous instances
proceeded from the people there have
been if i may so express it almost as
many popular as royal wars
the cries of the nation and the
importunities of their representatives
half upon various occasions dragged
their monarchs into war or continued
them in it
contrary to their inclinations and
sometimes contrary to their real
interests of the state
in that memorable struggle for
superiority between the rival houses of
austria and bourbon which so long kept
europe in a flame it is well known that
the antipathies of the english against
the french seconding the ambition or
rather the avarice of a favored leader
protracted the war beyond the limits
marked out by sound policy and for a
considerable time in opposition to the
views of the court
the wars of these two last mentioned
nations have in great
measure grown out of commercial
considerations the desire of supplanting
in the fear of being supplanted
either in particular branches of traffic
or in the general advantages of trade
and navigation
from this summary of what has taken
place in other countries whose
situations have borne the nearest
resemblance to our own what reason can
we have to confide in those reveries
which would seduce us into an
expectation of peace and cordiality
between the members of the present
confederacy in a state of separation
have we not already seen enough of the
fallacy and extravagance of those idol
theories which have amused us with
promises of exemption from the
imperfections weaknesses and evils
incident to society in every shape
is it not time to wake from the
deceitful dream of a golden age and to
adopt as a practical maxim for the
direction of our political conduct that
we
as well as the other inhabitants of the
globe are yet remote from the happy
empire of perfect wisdom and perfect
virtue
let the point of extreme depression to
which our national dignity and credit
have sunk
let the inconveniences felt everywhere
from a lacks and ill administration of
government let the revolt of a part of
the state of north carolina the late
menacing disturbances in pennsylvania
and the actual insurrections and
rebellions in massachusetts declare
so far as the general sense of mankind
from corresponding with the tenets of
those who endeavor to lull a sleep are
apprehensions of discord and hostility
between the states in the event of
disunion that it has from long
observation
of the progress of society become a sort
of axiom in politics
that vicinity or nearness of situation
constitutes nation's natural enemies
an intelligent writer expresses himself
on this subject to this effect
neighboring nations says he are
naturally enemies of each other unless
their common weakness forces them to
league in a confederate republic
and their constitution prevents the
differences that neighborhood occasions
extinguishing that secret jealousy which
disposes all states to aggrandize
themselves
at the expense of their neighbors this
passage at the same time
points out the evil and suggests the
remedy
publius